This is the problem of finding the median.
The input to the problem are n numbers and these are in arbitrary order.
So we assume that list is unsorted,
and the input is given to us as this one-dimensional array, capital A.
Our goal is to find the median of A,
this is the middle element.
When n is even it's not exactly clear what we mean by the median.
So for concreteness let's define the median as the n over second ceiling,
smallest element of A.
So when n is odd,
so n equals 2 times l plus 1 for some integer l. Then, in this case,
the median is the l plus first smallest,
and they're exactly l which are
most this median element and there is at least l which are least this median element.
It'll be useful for us to solve a more general problem.
Instead of finding the median element,
we want to find the k smallest,
where k is an input given to us.
More specifically, we're going to look at the following problem.
We're given an unsorted list A, just as before,
and we're also given an integer k,
where k is between one and n,
and our goal is to find the k smallest of A.
So if we set k equal to n over two,
then that'll be the median.
Now, if A happens to be sorted,
then it's easy to find the k smallest.
We just output the kth element of the sorted list.
So that gives us a very trivial algorithm for solving this problem.
Given an arbitrary A,
we simply sort A and then we output the kth element of this sorted list.
How long does this algorithm take?
Well, merge sort or several other algorithms,
take order n log n time to sort A,
so the total runtime of this algorithm will be order n log n. Now,
is it possible to find the kth smallest without first sorting A?
That's what we're going to do now, and in fact,
we'll find the k smallest in order n time,
instead of order n log n time.
What we're going to do now is this very clever divide and conquer
algorithm for finding the k smallest in order n time.
This algorithm is due to Blumb, Floyd,
Pratt, Rivest, and Tarjan from 1973.
The story is that they figured it out over lunch.
Once you see the algorithm and it's quite clever,
it'll be quite impressive that they just figured this out just over one lunchtime.